..
  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may
  not use this file except in compliance with the License. You may obtain
  a copy of the License at

          http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT
  WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the
  License for the specific language governing permissions and limitations
  under the License.


.. _ref-membership:

==================
Cluster Membership
==================

Concept
~~~~~~~

A :term:`Node` can belong to at most one :term:`Cluster` at any time. A node
is referred to as an *orphan node* when it doesn't belong to any cluster.

A node can be made a member of cluster when creation, or you can change the
cluster membership after the cluster and and the node have been created.


Listing Nodes in a Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Using the command :command:`openstack cluster members list`, you can list the
nodes that are members of a specific cluster. For example, to list nodes in
cluster ``c3``, you can use the following command::

  $ openstack cluster members list c3
  +----------+--------+-------+--------+-------------+---------------------+
  | id       | name   | index | status | physical_id | created_at          |
  +----------+--------+-------+--------+-------------+---------------------+
  | b28692a5 | stack1 | 1     | ACTIVE | fdf028a6    | 2015-07-07T05:23:40 |
  | 4be10a88 | stack2 | 2     | ACTIVE | 7c87f545    | 2015-07-07T05:27:54 |
  +----------+--------+-------+--------+-------------+---------------------+

You can use the name, the ID or the "short ID" of a cluster as the argument
for node listing. If the specified cluster identifier cannot match any cluster
or it matches more than one cluster, you will get an error message.

From the list, you can see the ``index``, ``status``, ``physical_id`` of each
node in this cluster. Note that the ``id`` field and the ``physical_id`` field
are shown as "short ID"s by default. If you want to see the full IDs, you can
specify the :option:`--full-id` option to indicate that::

  $ openstack cluster members list --full-id c3
  +------------...-+--------+-------+--------+-------------+-----------..-+
  | id             | name   | index | status | physical_id | created_at   |
  +------------...-+--------+-------+--------+-------------+-----------..-+
  | b28692a5-25... | stack1 | -1    | ACTIVE | fdf0...     | 2015-07-07.. |
  | 4be10a88-e3... | stack2 | -1    | ACTIVE | 7c87...     | 2015-07-07.. |
  +------------...-+--------+-------+--------+-------------+-----------..-+

If the cluster size is very large, you may want to list the nodes in pages.
This can be achieved by using the :option:`--marker` option together with the
:option:`--limit` option. The ``marker`` option value specifies a node ID
after which you want the resulted list to start; and the ``limit`` option
value specifies the number of nodes you want to include in the resulted list.
For example, the following command lists the nodes starting after a specific
node ID with the length of the list set to 10::

  $ openstack cluster members list --marker b28692a5 --limit 10 webservers

Another useful option for listing nodes is the :option:`--filters <FILTERS>`
option. The option value accepts a string of format "``K1=V1;K2=V2...``",
where "``K1``" and "``K2``" are node properties for checking, "``V1``" and
"``V2``" are values for filtering. The acceptable properties for filtering are
``name`` and ``status``. For example, the following command lists cluster
nodes from a cluster based on whether a node's status is "``ACTIVE``"::

  $ openstack cluster members list --filters status=ACTIVE webservers


Specify the Cluster When Creating a Node
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

There are several ways to make a node a member of a cluster. When creating a
node using command :command:`openstack cluster node create`, you can specify
the option :option:`--cluster` to tell Senlin to which cluster the new node
belongs. Please refer to :ref:`ref-nodes` for detailed instructions.


Adding Node(s) to A Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When you already have some nodes and some clusters, you can add some specified
nodes to a specified cluster using the :command:`openstack cluster members add`
command. For example, the following command adds two nodes to a cluster::

  $ openstack cluster members add --nodes node3,node4 cluster1

You can use the name, the ID or the "short ID" to name the node(s) to be
added, you can also use the name, the ID or the "short ID" to specify the
cluster. When the identifiers you specify cannot match any existing nodes or
clusters respectively, you will receive an error message. If the identifier
provided matches more than one object, you will get an error message as well.

Before Senlin engine performs the cluster membership changes, it will verify
if the nodes to be added have the same :term:`profile type` with the target
cluster. If the profile types don't match, you will get an error message.

When nodes are added to a cluster, they will get new ``index`` property values
that can be used to uniquely identify them within the cluster.


Removing Node(s) from a Cluster
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The :program:`openstack cluster` command line also provides command
:command:`cluster members del` to remove node(s) from a cluster. In this case,
you can use the name, the ID or the "short ID" to specify the node(s) and the
cluster. The identifier specified must uniquely identifies a node or a cluster
object, or else you will get an error message indicating that the request was
rejected. The following command removes two nodes from a cluster::

  $ openstack cluster members del --nodes node21,node22 webservers

When performing this operation, Senlin engine will check if the specified
nodes are actually members of the specified cluster. If any node from the
specified node list does not belong to the target cluster, you will get an
error message and the command fails.

When nodes are removed from a cluster, they will get their ``index`` property
reset to -1.


See Also
~~~~~~~~

Below are links to documents related to clusters and nodes:

- :doc:`Creating Clusters <clusters>`
- :doc:`Creating Nodes <nodes>`
